    6 adverse reactions

  because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in one clinical trial of a drug cannot be directly compared with the rates in the clinical trials of the same or another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.



 the data described below reflect exposure to besivance in approximately 1,000 patients between 1 and 98 years old with clinical signs and symptoms of bacterial conjunctivitis.



 the most frequently reported ocular adverse reaction was conjunctival redness, reported in approximately 2% of patients.



 other adverse reactions reported in patients receiving besivance occurring in approximately 1-2% of patients included: blurred vision, eye pain, eye irritation, eye pruritus and headache.



   excerpt:   the most common adverse reaction reported in 2% of patients treated with besivance was conjunctival redness. (  6  )



   to report suspected adverse reactions, contact bausch & lomb incorporated at 1-800-323-0000 or fda at 1-800-fda-1088 or  www.fda.gov/medwatch    
    5 warnings and precautions



  excerpt:   topical ophthalmic use only. (  5.1  )



 growth of resistant organisms with prolonged use. (  5.2  )



 avoidance of contact lenses. patients should not wear contact lenses if they have signs or symptoms of bacterial conjunctivitis or during the course of therapy with besivance (  5.3  )



 



   5.1 topical ophthalmic use only



  not for injection into the eye.



 besivance is for topical ophthalmic use only, and should not be injected subconjunctivally, nor should it be introduced directly into the anterior chamber of the eye.



    5.2 growth of resistant organisms with prolonged use



  as with other anti-infectives, prolonged use of besivance (besifloxacin ophthalmic suspension) 0.6% may result in overgrowth of non-susceptible organisms, including fungi. if super-infection occurs, discontinue use and institute alternative therapy. whenever clinical judgment dictates, the patient should be examined with the aid of magnification, such as slit-lamp biomicroscopy, and, where appropriate, fluorescein staining.



    5.3 avoidance of contact lenses



  patients should not wear contact lenses if they have signs or symptoms of bacterial conjunctivitis or during the course of therapy with besivance .
