    6 adverse reactions

  excerpt:   adverse reactions occurring in at least 1% of uloric-treated patients, and at least 0.5% greater than placebo, are liver function abnormalities, nausea, arthralgia, and rash. (  6.1  )



      



   to report suspected adverse reactions, contact takeda pharmaceuticals at 1-877-takeda-7 (1-877-825-3327) or fda at 1-800-fda-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.  



 

  6.1 clinical trials experience

  because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.



 a total of 2757 subjects with hyperuricemia and gout were treated with uloric 40 mg or 80 mg daily in clinical studies. for uloric 40 mg, 559 patients were treated for >=6 months. for uloric 80 mg, 1377 subjects were treated for >=6 months, 674 patients were treated for >=1 year and 515 patients were treated for >=2 years.



   most common adverse reactions  



 in three randomized, controlled clinical studies (studies 1, 2 and 3), which were six to 12 months in duration, the following adverse reactions were reported by the treating physician as related to study drug. table 1 summarizes adverse reactions reported at a rate of at least 1% in uloric treatment groups and at least 0.5% greater than placebo.




  table 1: adverse reactions occurring in >=1% of uloric-treated patients and at least 0.5%greater than seen in patients receiving placebo in controlled studies    
  adverse reactions              placebo                        uloric          allopurinolof the subjects who received allopurinol, 10 received 100 mg, 145 received 200 mg, and 1122 received 300 mg, based on level of renal impairment.    
  (n=134)                        40 mg daily(n=757)             80 mg daily(n=1279)    (n=1277)        
  liver function abnormalities    0.7%                           6.6%            4.6%            4.2%             
  nausea                         0.7%                           1.1%            1.3%            0.8%             
  arthralgia                      0%                            1.1%            0.7%            0.7%             
  rash                           0.7%                           0.5%            1.6%            1.6%             
           the most common adverse reaction leading to discontinuation from therapy was liver function abnormalities in 1.8% of uloric 40 mg, 1.2% of uloric 80 mg, and in 0.9% of allopurinol-treated subjects.
 

 in addition to the adverse reactions presented in table 1, dizziness was reported in more than 1% of uloric-treated subjects although not at a rate more than 0.5% greater than placebo.



   less common adverse reactions  



 in phase 2 and 3 clinical studies the following adverse reactions occurred in less than 1% of subjects and in more than one subject treated with doses ranging from 40 mg to 240 mg of uloric. this list also includes adverse reactions (less than 1% of subjects) associated with organ systems from warnings and precautions.



   blood and lymphatic system disorders  : anemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, leukocytosis/leukopenia, neutropenia, pancytopenia, splenomegaly, thrombocytopenia.



   cardiac disorders  : angina pectoris, atrial fibrillation/flutter, cardiac murmur, ecg abnormal, palpitations, sinus bradycardia, tachycardia.



   ear and labyrinth disorders  : deafness, tinnitus, vertigo.



   eye disorders  : vision blurred.



   gastrointestinal disorders  : abdominal distention, abdominal pain, constipation, dry mouth, dyspepsia, flatulence, frequent stools, gastritis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, gastrointestinal discomfort, gingival pain, haematemesis, hyperchlorhydria, hematochezia, mouth ulceration, pancreatitis, peptic ulcer, vomiting.



   general disorders and administration site conditions  : asthenia, chest pain/discomfort, edema, fatigue, feeling abnormal, gait disturbance, influenza-like symptoms, mass, pain, thirst.



   hepatobiliary disorders  : cholelithiasis/cholecystitis, hepatic steatosis, hepatitis, hepatomegaly.



   immune system disorder  : hypersensitivity.



   infections and infestations  : herpes zoster.



   procedural complications  : contusion.



   metabolism and nutrition disorders  : anorexia, appetite decreased/increased, dehydration, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, hypertriglyceridemia, hypokalemia, weight decreased/increased.



   musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders  : arthritis, joint stiffness, joint swelling, muscle spasms/twitching/tightness/weakness, musculoskeletal pain/stiffness, myalgia.



   nervous system disorders  : altered taste, balance disorder, cerebrovascular accident, guillain-barre syndrome, headache, hemiparesis, hypoesthesia, hyposmia, lacunar infarction, lethargy, mental impairment, migraine, paresthesia, somnolence, transient ischemic attack, tremor.



   psychiatric disorders  : agitation, anxiety, depression, insomnia, irritability, libido decreased, nervousness, panic attack, personality change.



   renal and urinary disorders  : hematuria, nephrolithiasis, pollakiuria, proteinuria, renal failure, renal insufficiency, urgency, incontinence.



   reproductive system and breast changes  : breast pain, erectile dysfunction, gynecomastia.



   respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders  : bronchitis, cough, dyspnea, epistaxis, nasal dryness, paranasal sinus hypersecretion, pharyngeal edema, respiratory tract congestion, sneezing, throat irritation, upper respiratory tract infection.



   skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders  : alopecia, angio-edema, dermatitis, dermographism, ecchymosis, eczema, hair color changes, hair growth abnormal, hyperhidrosis  ,  peeling skin, petechiae, photosensitivity, pruritus, purpura, skin discoloration/altered pigmentation, skin lesion, skin odor abnormal, urticaria.



   vascular disorders  : flushing, hot flush, hypertension, hypotension.



   laboratory parameters:  activated partial thromboplastin time prolonged, creatine increased, bicarbonate decreased, sodium increased, eeg abnormal, glucose increased, cholesterol increased, triglycerides increased, amylase increased, potassium increased, tsh increased, platelet count decreased, hematocrit decreased, hemoglobin decreased, mcv increased, rbc decreased, creatinine increased, blood urea increased, bun/creatinine ratio increased, creatine phosphokinase (cpk) increased, alkaline phosphatase increased, ldh increased, psa increased, urine output increased/decreased, lymphocyte count decreased, neutrophil count decreased, wbc increased/decreased, coagulation test abnormal, low density lipoprotein (ldl) increased, prothrombin time prolonged, urinary casts, urine positive for white blood cells and protein.



   cardiovascular safety  



 cardiovascular events and deaths were adjudicated to one of the pre-defined endpoints from the anti-platelet trialists' collaborations (aptc) (cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, and non-fatal stroke) in the randomized controlled and long-term extension studies. in the phase 3 randomized controlled studies, the incidences of adjudicated aptc events per 100 patient-years of exposure were: placebo 0 (95% ci 0.00-6.16), uloric 40 mg 0 (95% ci 0.00-1.08), uloric 80 mg 1.09 (95% ci 0.44-2.24), and allopurinol 0.60 (95% ci 0.16-1.53).



 in the long-term extension studies, the incidences of adjudicated aptc events were: uloric 80 mg 0.97 (95% ci 0.57-1.56), and allopurinol 0.58 (95% ci 0.02-3.24).



 overall, a higher rate of aptc events was observed in uloric than in allopurinol-treated patients. a causal relationship with uloric has not been established. monitor for signs and symptoms of mi and stroke.



   6.2 postmarketing experience

  adverse reactions have been identified during postapproval use of uloric. because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship.



   hepatobiliary disorders:  hepatic failure (some fatal), jaundice, serious cases of abnormal liver function test results, liver disorder.



   immune system disorders:  anaphylaxis, anaphylactic reaction.



   musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders:  rhabdomyolysis.



   psychiatric disorders:  psychotic behavior including aggressive thoughts.



   renal and urinary disorders:  tubulointerstitial nephritis.



   skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders:  generalized rash, stevens johnson syndrome, hypersensitivity skin reactions.
    5 warnings and precautions



   excerpt:    *     gout flare : an increase in gout flares is frequently observed during initiation of anti-hyperuricemic agents, including uloric. if a gout flare occurs during treatment, uloric need not be discontinued. prophylactic therapy (i.e., non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug [nsaid] or colchicine upon initiation of treatment) may be beneficial for up to six months. (  2.4  ,  5.1  ) 
 *     cardiovascular events : a higher rate of cardiovascular thromboembolic events was observed in patients treated with uloric than allopurinol in clinical trials. monitor for signs and symptoms of mi and stroke. (  5.2  ) 
 *     hepatic effects: postmarketing reports of hepatic failure, sometimes fatal. causality cannot be excluded. if liver injury is detected, promptly interrupt uloric and assess patient for probable cause, then treat cause if possible, to resolution or stabilization. do not restart uloric if liver injury is confirmed and no alternate etiology can be found. (  5.3  ) 
    
 

   5.1 gout flare



  after initiation of uloric, an increase in gout flares is frequently observed. this increase is due to reduction in serum uric acid levels, resulting in mobilization of urate from tissue deposits.



 in order to prevent gout flares when uloric is initiated, concurrent prophylactic treatment with an nsaid or colchicine is recommended [see  dosage and administration (2.4)  ].  



    5.2 cardiovascular events



  in the randomized controlled studies, there was a higher rate of cardiovascular thromboembolic events (cardiovascular deaths, non-fatal myocardial infarctions, and non-fatal strokes) in patients treated with uloric (0.74 per 100 p-y [95% confidence interval (ci) 0.36-1.37]) than allopurinol (0.60 per 100 p-y [95% ci 0.16-1.53]) [see  adverse reactions (6.1)  ]  . a causal relationship with uloric has not been established. monitor for signs and symptoms of myocardial infarction (mi) and stroke.



    5.3 hepatic effects



   there have been postmarketing reports of fatal and non-fatal hepatic failure in patients taking uloric, although the reports contain insufficient information necessary to establish the probable cause. during randomized controlled studies, transaminase elevations greater than three times the upper limit of normal (uln) were observed (ast: 2%, 2%, and alt: 3%, 2% in uloric and allopurinol-treated patients, respectively). no dose-effect relationship for these transaminase elevations was noted [see        clinical pharmacology (12.3)   ]     .  



  obtain a liver test panel (serum alanine aminotransferase [alt], aspartate aminotransferase [ast], alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin) as a baseline before initiating uloric.  



  measure liver tests promptly in patients who report symptoms that may indicate liver injury, including fatigue, anorexia, right upper abdominal discomfort, dark urine or jaundice. in this clinical context, if the patient is found to have abnormal liver tests (alt greater than three times the upper limit of the reference range), uloric treatment should be interrupted and investigation done to establish the probable cause. uloric should not be restarted in these patients without another explanation for the liver test abnormalities.  



  patients who have serum alt greater than three times the reference range with serum total bilirubin greater than two times the reference range without alternative etiologies are at risk for severe drug-induced liver injury and should not be restarted on uloric. for patients with lesser elevations of serum alt or bilirubin and with an alternate probable cause, treatment with uloric can be used with caution.  
