    6 adverse reactions

  because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.



 the following serious adverse reactions are described below and elsewhere in the labeling:



 . anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity reactions  [    see warnings and precautions (  5.1  )].  



 the most common adverse reactions (>=10%) observed across pre-marketing clinical trials were similar in type and frequency as those observed in the placebo-controlled trial (see table1). the acute reactions requiring intervention were managed by either temporarily interrupting or discontinuing infusion, and administering additional antihistamine, antipyretics, or corticosteroids.



   excerpt:   the most common adverse reactions (>=10% in vimizim patients and occurring at a higher incidence than placebo-treated patients) were pyrexia, vomiting, headache, nausea, abdominal pain, chills, and fatigue (  6.1  ).



   to report suspected adverse reactions, contact biomarin at 1-866-906-6100 or fda at 1-800-fda-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.  



 

  6.1 clinical trials experience

  a 24-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial of vimizim was conducted in 176 patients with mps iva, ages 5 to 57 years old.  approximately half of the patients (49%) were male.  of the 176 patients, 65% were white, 23% asian, 3% black, and 10% other race.  the majority of patients (78%) were non-hispanic. patients were randomized to three treatment groups:  vimizim 2 mg/kg once per week (n=58), vimizim 2 mg/kg once every other week (n=59), or placebo (n=59).  all patients were treated with antihistamines prior to each infusion.



 table 1 summarizes the most common adverse reactions that occurred in the placebo-controlled trial with an incidence of >= 10% in patients treated with vimizim 2 mg/kg once per week and with a higher incidence than in the placebo-treated patients. 



   table 1: adverse reactions that occurred in the placebo-controlled trial in at least 10% of patients in the vimizim 2 mg/kg once per week group and with a higher incidence than in the placebo group  




  adverse reaction    vimizim 2 mg/kg once per week    placebo          
                   n= 58n (%)       n= 59  n (%)     
  pyrexia          19 (33%)         8 (14%)          
  vomiting         18 (31%)         4 (7%)           
  headache         15 (26%)         9 (15%)          
  nausea           14 (24%)         4 (7%)           
  abdominal pain    12 (21%)         1 (1.7%)         
  chills           6 (10.3%)        1 (1.7%)         
  fatigue          6 (10.3%)        2 (3.4%)         
           extension trial  
 

 an open-label extension trial was conducted in 173 patients who completed the placebo-controlled trial  [see clinical studies (  14  )]  . no new adverse reactions were reported.



   6.2 immunogenicity

  as with all therapeutic proteins, there is potential for immunogenicity. all patients treated with vimizim 2 mg/kg once per week in the placebo-controlled trial developed anti-drug antibodies by week 4. anti-drug antibody titers were sustained or increased for the duration of vimizim treatment. because all patients developed anti-drug antibodies, associations between antibody titers and reductions in treatment effect or the occurrence of anaphylaxis or other hypersensitivity reactions could not be determined.



 all patients treated with vimizim 2 mg/kg once per week tested positive for neutralizing antibodies capable of inhibiting the drug from binding to the mannose-6-phosphate receptor at least once during the trial. binding to this receptor is required for vimizim to be taken into cells where it is active.  neutralizing antibody titers were not determined in the patients.  therefore, the possibility of an association between neutralizing antibody titer and treatment effect cannot be assessed.



 assessment of the incidence of antibody formation is highly dependent on the sensitivity and specificity of the assay. additionally, the observed incidence of antibody (including neutralizing antibody) positivity in an assay may be influenced by several factors including assay methodology, sample handling, timing of sample collection, concomitant medications, and underlying disease. for these reasons, comparison of the incidence of antibodies to vimizim with the incidence of antibodies to other products may be misleading.


    boxed warning: warning: risk of anaphylaxis

    warning: risk of anaphylaxis  

    life-threatening anaphylactic reactions have occurred in some patients during vimizim infusions. anaphylaxis, presenting as cough, erythema, throat tightness, urticaria, flushing, cyanosis, hypotension, rash, dyspnea, chest discomfort, and gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., nausea, abdominal pain, retching, and vomiting) in conjunction with urticaria, have been reported to occur during vimizim infusions, regardless of duration of the course of treatment. closely observe patients during and after vimizim administration and be prepared to manage anaphylaxis. inform patients of the signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis and have them seek immediate medical care should symptoms occur.  patients with acute respiratory illness may be at risk of serious acute exacerbation of their respiratory compromise due to hypersensitivity reactions, and require additional monitoring   [see warnings and precautions (  5.1  ,   5.2  ) and adverse reactions (  6  )]  .  



   excerpt:     warning: risk of anaphylaxis  



     see full prescribing information for complete boxed warning    .



   life-threatening anaphylactic reactions have occurred in some patients during vimizim infusions. anaphylaxis, presenting as cough, erythema, throat tightness, urticaria, flushing, cyanosis, hypotension, rash, dyspnea, chest discomfort, and gastrointestinal symptoms in conjunction with urticaria, have been reported to occur during infusions, regardless of duration of the course of treatment. closely observe patients during and after vimizim administration and be prepared to manage anaphylaxis. inform patients of the signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis and have them seek immediate medical care should symptoms occur.  patients with acute respiratory illness may be at risk of serious acute exacerbation of their respiratory compromise due to hypersensitivity reactions, and require additional     monitoring (      5.1      ,       5.2      ,       6      ).  
    5 warnings and precautions



  excerpt:   . anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity reactions: life-threatening anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity reactions have been observed in some patients during treatment with vimizim. if anaphylaxis or severe hypersensitivity reactions occur, immediately stop the infusion and initiate appropriate medical treatment. pre-treatment with antihistamines with or without antipyretics is recommended prior to the start of infusion (  5.1  ). 



 . risk of acute respiratory complications: patients with acute febrile or respiratory illness may be at higher risk of life-threatening complications from hypersensitivity reactions. careful consideration should be given to the patient's clinical status prior to administration of vimizim and consider delaying the vimizim infusion (  5.2  ).



 



   5.1 anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity reactions



  anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in patients treated with vimizim. in premarketing clinical trials, 18 of 235 (7.7%) patients treated with vimizim experienced signs and symptoms consistent with anaphylaxis. these 18 patients experienced 26 anaphylactic reactions during infusion with signs and symptoms including cough, erythema, throat tightness, urticaria, flushing, cyanosis, hypotension, rash, dyspnea, chest discomfort, and gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., nausea, abdominal pain, retching, and vomiting) in conjunction with urticaria. these cases of anaphylaxis occurred as early as 30 minutes from the start of infusion and up to three hours after infusion.  anaphylaxis occurred as late into treatment as the 47  th  infusion.



 in clinical trials with vimizim, 44 of 235 (18.7%) patients experienced hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis. hypersensitivity reactions have occurred as early as 30 minutes from the start of infusion but as late as six days after infusion. frequent symptoms of hypersensitivity reactions (occurring in more than 2 patients) included anaphylactic reactions, urticaria, peripheral edema, cough, dyspnea, and flushing.



 due to the potential for anaphylaxis, appropriate medical support should be readily available when vimizim is administered. observe patients closely for an appropriate period of time after administration of vimizim, taking into account the time to onset of anaphylaxis seen in premarketing clinical trials. inform patients of the signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis, and instruct them to seek immediate medical care should signs and symptoms occur. 



 because of the potential for hypersensitivity reactions, administer antihistamines with or without antipyretics prior to infusion. management of hypersensitivity reactions should be based on the severity of the reaction and include slowing or temporary interruption of the infusion and/or administration of additional antihistamines, antipyretics, and/or corticosteroids for mild reactions. however, if severe hypersensitivity reactions occur, immediately stop the infusion of vimizim and initiate appropriate treatment.



 consider the risks and benefits of re-administering vimizim following a severe reaction.



    5.2 risk of acute respiratory complications



  patients with acute febrile or respiratory illness at the time of vimizim infusion may be at higher risk of life-threatening complications from hypersensitivity reactions. careful consideration should be given to the patient's clinical status prior to administration of vimizim and consider delaying the vimizim infusion.



 sleep apnea is common in mps iva patients.  evaluation of airway patency should be considered prior to initiation of treatment with vimizim.  patients using supplemental oxygen or continuous positive airway pressure (cpap) during sleep should have these treatments readily available during infusion in the event of an acute reaction, or extreme drowsiness/sleep induced by antihistamine use.



    5.3 spinal or cervical cord compression



  spinal or cervical cord compression (scc) is a known and serious complication of mps iva and may occur as part of the natural history of the disease. in clinical trials, scc was observed both in patients receiving vimizim and patients receiving placebo.  patients with mps iva should be monitored for signs and symptoms of scc (including back pain, paralysis of limbs below the level of compression, urinary and fecal incontinence) and given appropriate clinical care.
